## Acknowledgements

I would not have reached this point without the support of many people. 
First I would like to thank my mentor Casey Greene for helping me grow from a first-year grad student with aspirations of diagnosing all human disease with a cleverly designed model to a wisened (or maybe wizened) PhD candidate who believes that data is paramount. 
I still remember reading papers as an undergrad trying to better understand what was going on at the intersection of computational biology and machine learning and wondering “What is the University of Pennsylvania and why does this Casey guy’s papers keep showing up in my searches?” 
Thank you to my thesis committee: Marylyn Ritchie, Russ Altman, Konrad Kording, and Kai Wang. 
Your feedback has helped keep my research from going off the rails. 
Thank you as well to Greenelab members past and present. 
From grilling me to help prepare for prelims, to going on adventures with me in Colorado, to giving me tips on where to find free food, you’ve all helped me to better understand science and what it means to be a scientist. 
Thanks to Shuo Zhang and Liz Heller for collaborating with me on MousiPLIER, the project would not have been possible without you. 
I would also like to thank John Holmes for agreeing to be my advisor at Penn when Greenelab moved west to Colorado. 
In addition, I’d like to thank the GCB administration, especially Maureen Kirsch, Anne-Cara Apple, and Ben Voigt. 
You all do a good job of looking after students and making sure we don’t fall through the cracks due to conditions beyond our control.

I’ve also been helped through grad school by many people outside of academia. 
Thanks Mom, Dad, Nana, Mary, Wes, and Sujin, your support has meant a lot even if you don’t always understand what I’m talking about. 
Thanks as well to Rachel Ungar, and sorry that we didn’t get an opportunity to collaborate (yet?) 
If you hadn’t teamed up with me in the audacious plan to get internships at the NIH after sophomore year, I wouldn’t be where I am today. 
Thanks to my friends in Philly and in Texas for convincing me to get outside the lab and have fun on occasion, and for giving conflicting advice on whether or not I should drop out of grad school. 
Finally, thank you Sydney for helping me see that there is a world going on outside of the small bubble I interact with on a daily basis. 
I know that living with a PhD candidate has been frustrating at times, especially as I’ve gotten closer to defending and therefore progressively less interesting. 
I’m tempted to come up with something witty to write here, but you’d probably prefer sincerity, so: thank you.
