## Introduction                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
As computational biologists, we live in exciting times.
Beginning with the Human Genome Project [@doi:10.1038/35057062], advancements in technologies for biological quantification have generated data with a scale and granularity previously unimaginable [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.002; @doi:10.7554/eLife.21856; @doi:10.1101/gad.281964.116].

Concurrently with the skyrocketing amounts of data, the advent of deep learning has generated methods designed to make sense of large, complex datasets.
These methods have led to a paradigm shift in machine learning, creating new possibilities in many fields and surfacing new phenomena unexplained by classical machine learning theory [@doi:10.1038/nature16961; @arxiv:2112.10752; @arxiv:1912.02292; @arxiv:2201.02177].

The field of computational biology has long used machine learning methods, as they help cope with the scale of the data being generated.
Accordingly, problem domains in computational biology that map well to existing research in deep learning have adopted or developed deep learning models and seen great advances [@doi:10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4_28; @doi:10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2].
Previous applications of classical machine learning to the field of transcriptomics have been successful.
Two of the scientists who wrote the book [@isbn:0387848576] on machine learning have even written papers [@doi:10.1073/pnas.082099299; @doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxl002; 10.1186/gb-2000-1-2-research0003; 10.1093/biostatistics/kxl005] analyzing gene expression.
However, the data itself is not well-suited to deep learning methods.

This dissertation explores whether the paradigm shift in machine learning will spill over to transcriptomics.
That is to say, have deep learning techniques fundamentally changed transcriptomics, or are they incremental improvements over existing methods?
Our thesis is that while deep learning provides valuable tools for analyzing biological datasets, it does not necessarily change the field on a fundamental level.

We begin with a few sections giving background information on previous research for the main thesis chapters.
We then move to chapter 2, which discusses standards necessary to ensure that research done with deep learning is reproducible.
We continue to Chapter 3, where we find that deep learning models may not be helpful in analyzing expression data.
In chapters 4 and 5 we demonstrate that classical machine learning methods already allow scientists to uncover knowledge from large datasets.
Finally, in chapter 6 we conclude by discussing the implications of the previous chapters and their potential future directions.
