## Results

### MousiPLIER learns latent variables with ideal pathway level and gene-level sparsity

To determine the utility of a mouse multiPLIER model, we first trained the model.
We then examined the latent variables that our model learned and found which were significantly enriched in a mouse brain aging study.
Next, we looked deeper into the significant wild-type microglia-associated latent variables and determined that they were learning striatal signals potentially relevant to aging.
Ultimately, we found that our trained PLIER model is able to uncover relevant signal in individual studies, and will be useful going forward in uncovering the biological processes present in mouse transcriptomic experiments.
Taken together this study provides proof of concept that the mouse PLIER model can surface meaningful biological processes in mouse transcriptomic studies.

We trained MousiPLIER by using an on-disk PCA implementation to initialize PLIER, modifying the pipeline to work with mouse data, and using a high-mem compute node to manage the size of the matrix decomposition (see Methods for more details).
The resulting model had 196 latent variables, where the per-latent variable distribution had an average of around 65% sparsity, which is to say that the latent variables tended to use only around 35% of the genes in the training data (Fig. @fig:genesparsity).
While many of the latent variables corresponded to no pathways, indicating signals in the training data not passed in as prior knowledge, those that remained corresponded to few pathways (Fig. @fig:pathwaysparsity).
This pathway-level and gene-level sparsity is ideal, as it allows us to interrogate individual latent variables that correspond to a small number of biological functions.

![
The distribution of the percentage of genes from the training set which had nonzero loadings for the latent variable.
](./images/filtered_percent_genes_used_hist.png "Sparsity per latent variable."){#fig:genesparsity width="75%"}

![
The distribution of the number of prior knowledge gene sets used per latent variable.
](./images/filtered_lv_per_pathway_hist.png "Genesets used per latent variable"){#fig:pathwaysparsity width="75%"}

### Some latent variables in MousiPLIER are enriched in wild-type microglia
With our model trained, we began interrogating our latent variables.
Because we were interested in brain-relevant latent variables that our model had learned from the compendium, we analyzed a study on mouse brain aging from Pan et al. [@doi:10.1186/s12974-020-01774-9].
In this study, microglia and astrocytes from five ages of mice were sequenced to see how their gene expression changed over time.
To determine which (if any) latent variables were changed across developmental aging in the study, we used a linear model to find the latent variables that changed significantly as the cells aged.
We found that each condition in the study had a set of significant latent variables, but that they were largely disjoint (Fig. @fig:venn).
To narrow down the scope of the analysis, we decided to validate the biological relevance of the latent variables associated with wild-type microglial cells.

![
The overlap in significantly enriched latent variables across types and experimental conditions.
](./images/dif_LV_venn.png "Latent variable overlap"){#fig:venn width="100%"}

### Latent variable 41 demonstrates the biological relevance of mousiplier latent variables
Once we had microglia-associated latent variables of interest, we set out to find which experiments in the training data responded strongly to them.
To do so, we developed a novel method of ranking experiments based on their latent variable weights.
More precisely, we performed *k*-means clustering with a *k* of two on each experiment in each latent variable space, and ranked experiments by their silhouette scores.
This procedure allowed us to uncover experiments where there were two groups of samples with distinct sets of values for our latent variables of interest.

We focused this approach on latent variable 41, which contains genes functionally associated with striatal cell type specificity. 
Upon examining the top ranked studies, we found that several with high silhouette scores for latent variable 41 corresponded to processes ocurring in the brain (Fig. @fig:clusters).
We dug deeper into which samples in particular were present in each clustered experiment and found our latent variable was in fact reflecting a biological process ocurring in the striatum and cortex but not the cerebellum or non-brain tissues (Fig. @fig:brain).
For example, in study SRP070440 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE76872) the striatal samples clearly stand apart from the other neuronal tissues.
Similarly, we found that the two distinct groups in SRP047452 [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1411263112] were made up of brain samples from embryonic and adult mice, supporting the association between latent variable 41 and aging we found in the study we used to derive the latent variables (Fig. @fig:aging).

![
Latent variable 41 expression values are higher for striatum tissue samples than other tissues in SRP070440.
](./images/lv_41_studies.svg "Study clusters"){#fig:clusters width="100%"}

![ 
Striatal values for latent variable 41 compared to other tissues and brain regions.
](./images/brain_samples.png "Striatum LV41"){#fig:brain width="100%"}

![
The effects of aging on latent variable 41.
](./images/aging_samples.png "LV41 aging"){#fig:aging width="100%"}

To allow others to look at the learned latent variables on their own, we have set up a web server at https://www.mousiplier.greenelab.com. 
This server allows users to list the genes present in, visualize which experiments had high cluster scores for, and see which biological pathways participate in each latent variable (Fig. @fig:webserver).

![
An image of the webserver displaying the per-latent variable experiment ranking feature.
](./images/webserver.png "webserver"){#fig:webserver width="100%"}
