## Methods

### Data
We began by downloading all the mouse gene expression data in Recount3, along with its corresponding metadata [@doi:10.1186/s13059-021-02533-6].
We then removed the single-cell RNAseq data from the dataset to ensure our data sources were fairly consistent across samples and studies.
Next, we filtered the expression data, keeping only genes that overlapped between Recount3 and our prior-knowledge genesets.
Finally, we RPKM transformed the expression using gene lengths from the Ensembl BioMart database [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkaa942] and Z-scored the expression data to ensure a consistent range for the downstream PLIER model.

For our prior knowledge gene sets we used cell type marker genes from CellMarker [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky900], pathway gene sets from Reactome [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkab1028], and manually curated brain marker genes.
We selected cell type marker genes corresponding to all available mouse cell types within the CellMarker database.
For mouse biological pathways, we downloaded pathway information from the Reactome database.
More specifically, we processed the files "Ensembl2Reactome_All_Levels.txt", "ReactomePathways.txt", and "ReactomePathwaysRelation.txt", selecting only pathways using mouse genes, filtering out all pathways with fewer than 5 genes present, and keeping only pathways that were leaf nodes on the pathway hierarchy.
Because we were interested in mouse brains in particular, we rounded out our set of prior information by manually selecting marker genes for the striatum, midbrain, and cerebellum.
In total, we used 1,003 prior knowledge pathways when training our model.

### PLIER 
We began the PLIER pipeline by precomputing the initialization for PLIER with incremental PCA in scikit-learn [@skl].
We then used the expression compendium, prior knowledge genesets, and PCA initializations to train a PLIER model.
The resulting task took two days to run and yielded 196 latent variables.

### Latent variable significance
To determine which latent variables were associated with experimental conditions, we used a linear model.
To correct the p-values for multiple testing, we used the Benjamani-Hochberg procedure [@doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x].

### Clustering 
We selected the latent variables significantly associated with aging in mouse microglia as a biological starting point.
We then used these latent variables to query the training data and see which studies seemed associated with the same biological signals.
To do so, we used *k*-means clustering with a *k* of 2, to look for experiments where there was some experimental condition that affected the latent variable.
We then ranked the top ten studies based on their silhouette scores, and looked to see which conditions were associated with relevant experimental variables.

### Hardware
The PLIER model training was performed on the Penn Medicine high performance computing cluster.
The full pipeline takes around two weeks to run, with the main bottlenecks being the Recount3 data download, which takes one week to run, and training the PLIER model, which takes two days on a compute node with 250GB of RAM.

### Web Server
The web server for visualizing the results was built on top of the ADAGE web app framework [@doi:10.1186/s12859-017-1905-4].
The main changes we made were to substitute the latent variables and gene sets from our trained PLIER model, to use clusters' silhouette scores for ranking experiments, and to forgo uploading the input expression data as the mouse compendium we used was much larger than the input expression for ADAGE.
