## Discussion/Conclusion

In this paper we demonstrate that it is possible to train large PLIER models on mouse data.
We then show that the learned latent variables map to various biological processes and cell types.
We also describe a novel approach for surfacing latent-variable relevant experiments from an expression compendium. 
Namely, we cluster them based on latent variable values, allowing us to query a large compendium for experiments pertaining to mouse striatal aging.
Finally, we create a web server to make the model's results more easily accessible to other scientists.

Our study is not without its limitations though.
We show how a study from outside the training data can be transformed into the latent space to see which of the learned latent variables have significant differences in the study.
However, not all studies will have significant changes in latent variables between their experimental conditions.
This may be due to lack of similar samples in training compendium, too few samples in the study of interest, or other factors.
In these cases, there isn't a good way to select which latent variables should be used for downstream analyses.

Additionally, PLIER is a linear model.
If there are non-linear relationships between the genes used to train the model and the learned biological pathways, at best PLIER can approximate them.
While we do not expect this to have a large impact [@doi:10.1101/2022.06.22.497194], incorporating prior knowledge into non-linear models such as neural networks is an exciting field of research and a potential improvement for the MultiPLIER framework we use.

Going forward, our model and web server will allow scientists to explore the latent space of their own experiments and learn about relevant biological pathways and cell types.
